---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 12 (June 29-July 5, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
mathjax: true
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinate me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Biology

### Structural cells regulate organ-specific immune responses

When we talk about immune response, we often think of gene expression changes
that happen in haematopoietic immune cells, which include myeloid cells, such
as monocytes and neutrophils that are responsible for innate immunity, and
lymphoid cells, such as T cells and B cells that constitute adaptive
immunity. But what about other cell types? We know that many of them also
contribute to pathogen defence, but how is that achieved? How is expression of
immune genes controlled in non-immune cells?

[Krausgruber *et al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2424-4)
reported in an *Nature* article their systematic study of regulation of
immune genes in three major types of structural cells: epithelium, endothelium,
and fibroblasts. They characterized cell types across twelve organs in mice,
using cellular phenotyping, transcriptome sequencing, chromatin accessibility
profiling, and epigenome mapping. They observed complex immune gene activity
and regulation in these structural cells, which are highly organ-specific, and
seem to modulate interactions between structural and haematopoietic cells.

The dataset can be used to analyse immune response from structural cells at
multiple omics levels. We are not sure yet whether human cells follow the same
principles. Another aspect I miss is the multi-omics profiling following
perturbation by pathogens or chemical matters that induce immune response.
Nevertheless, the dataset is already impressive enough and will for sure inspire
further studies in the same direction.

## Computational biology

### Modelling interactions between the immune system and cancer

This review, [*Interactions Between the Immune System and Cancer: A Brief Review
of Non-spatial Mathematical
Models*](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11538-010-9526-3) by Eftimie
*et al.* summarizes some commonly used non-spatial mathematical models to study
interactions between the immune system and cancer. I discovered it through
another paper that I [read the other day]({% post_url
2020-06-25-math-model-and-scRNAseq-for-immunotherapy %}) on integrating
mathematical modelling with single-cell omics data, [Griffiths *et
al.*](https://www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/06/19/1918937117) (PNAS 2020).

Though the review is almost ten years old and therefore could not
anticipate certain types of data, for instance single-cell sequencing, the
principles of mathematical modelling are valid, and the approaches may be useful
also for other disease indications as well.

## Programming

* In a R ShinyApp, changes in `ui.R` or `server.R` will cause the server to
    restart automatically. If other dependencies (say R functions) are changed
    and a manual restart is necessary, it suffices to run `touch restart.txt`
    command in the ShinyApp directory. It will force the ShinyApp to restart.

## Other gems

### Get the courage to leave familiar tracks

I am reading the book *Beschleunigung - Die Veränderung der Zeitstrukturen in
der Moderne* by Hartmut Rosa (an English version, named *Social Acceleration: A
New Theory of Modernity*, is also available). I find the book a stunningly
rich, informative, and comprehensive critique of acceleration. [It makes me
think how to live]({% post_url 2020-06-17-about-time %}).

This week I discovered a talk that Hartmut Rosa gave to first-year students of
the Friedrich-Schiller University of Jena in Germany, titled [*Wächter, wie
lange noch die Nacht? Ueber intellektuelle Redlichkeit als Leitprinzip in
schwieriger Zeit*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=koWklQKd7yU) (in German
only). The talk is directed at new students, but I think the lessons are helpful for me, too.

I was reminded of the observation of *baseline happiness*, namely the grade of
happiness for most people remains mostly constant, and reminded of the
conclusion that how happy we are is strongly influenced by how we perceive our
environment and how we participate in shaping it. In order to actively shape
the environment, we can expand our horizon by learning new things, we can bring
up our initiative, and we can live and think like people we want to become.

Hartmut Rosa reminded me that we need both enthusiasm and hard work to be
successful in our work, but they are not sufficient. Good ideas and
inspirations are important. Paradoxically, neuroscience confirms that good
ideas and inspirations may not necessarily fall over someone during hard work.
Instead, they visit us rather in unexpected time and space, for instance during
a walk or in a party, when we are not actively thinking of the problems.
Therefore, taking rest and exercising regularly and engaging in hobbies are not
only important for a balanced life, but also important for work, especially
work where ideas and creativity are important, such as scientific research.

An important concept I learned was *scientific honesty* (*Wissenschaftliche
Redlichkeit* in German). A key part of it is to take opposite opinions and
evidence that arguing against my own opinions seriously, even more seriously
than my own opinions. That does not mean I have to change or discard my views
and positions. Rather, it urges me not to ignore or deny
&lsquo;uncomfortable&rsquo; facts. Apparently, the scientific honesty does not
only helps to win the respect and understanding of people with a different view
from mine, but also helps to make my judgement and world view more informed.

Two other things leave me ponder. One is that when being asked how would she live
if she has another chance, the grandmother of Hartmut Rosa, shortly before she
passed away, replied that she would live exactly as she did, though without
fear. It is a daily challenge to live with trust in oneself, not fear, to deal
with the changes in the environment.

The other is the text of lecture *Science as a Vocation* (*Wissenschaft als
Beruf*) by Max Weber, a German sociologist and political economist. Both [German
version](https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Wissenschaft_als_Beruf) and [English
version](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/X/WeberScienceVocation.pdf) are
available. I was not aware of the text before, and therefore are thankful that
Hartmut Rosa introduced this to the students and me.

### Blue eyes, brown eyes

I read the story about *blue eyes, brown eyes* in a German article published on [srf.ch](https://www.srf.ch/news/international/blaue-augen-vs-braune-augen-jane-elliotts-schocktherapie-gegen-rassismus). The english version is available at [frontline](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/introduction-2/).

The American teacher Jane Elliott divided her class into two groups: blue eyes, and brown eyes, at the end of 1960s. She made up a theory to prefer the blue eyes and to discriminate the brown eyes (in the later phase of the experiment, she switched the groups). 

It surprised her to observe that it took only 15 minutes to turn otherwise similar children into two classes. Children who were designated as &ldquo;inferior&rdquo; lost self confidence, and performed poorly on tests and other work. In contrast, the &ldquo;superior&rdquo; students, who had been sweet and tolerate before the exercise, became mean-spirited and seemed to like discriminating against the &ldquo;inferior&rdquo; group.

{%include image.html
url="https://i2.wp.com/www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/00000309_03.png?resize=900%2C512"
description="Screenshot from FRONTLINE's A Class Divided. Source: FRONTLINE"
%}

&ldquo;I watched what had been marvelous, cooperative, wonderful, thoughtful children turn into nasty, vicious, discriminating little third-graders in a space of fifteen minutes,&rdquo; says Elliott. She &ldquo;created a microcosm of society in a third-grade classroom.&rdquo;

I think it is a marvelous experiment. Jane Elliott found a simple yet fantastic way to show children and adults alike how discrimination works, and how it affects both discriminating and discriminated people.

### Modelling study

{% include image.html
url="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/modeling_study.png"
description="Modelling study, from XKCD"
%}

Have a nice weekend!
