---
layout: post
title: >-
  Discoveries Weekly No. 16 (July 28-August 2, 2020): Zettelkasten
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

In the past three months, I posted my weekly discoveries on Fridays. It was a
period of intensive learning. The experience convinced me of the benefit of
taking notes, explaining learnings with one's own language, and linking the
notes. Now it is time for something new.

I draw positive conclusions from the experience of reporting weekly
discoveries with me and go on to the next phase. Instead of collecting and
report new things every Friday, I will focus on synthesizing links between the
knowledge and ideas that I collect. The saved time of Friday writings will be
spent on publishing in-depth blog posts (so please stay tuned), and on my
teaching and writing project on [applied mathematics and informatics, *i.e.*
multiscale modelling, in drug discovery](https://github.com/Accio/AMIDD).

Nevertheless, in this last post of *Discovery Weekly* in its current form, I do
want to report a recent discovery: the Zettelkasten system of knowledge
management.

Starting from last week, I started taking notes using the Zettelkasten method,
which I noted in a previous [Discovery Weekly]({% post_url
2020-07-17-dw14-2020KW29 %}).  The basic idea is to keep notes in *zettel*, a
slip (piece of paper) or a plain-text file, and linking the notes with each
other. It was developed by Niklas Luhmann, a sociologist who covers a wide area
of research and was extremely prolific. Many articles are available online that
introduce the method, a few of which can be found at the end of this post.

* TOC
{:toc}

## My experience of note taking and knowledge management

Before 2018, my notes were all in written notebooks. They were archived, but
seldom looked twice. Finding relevant information was particularly difficult.
Since then, I use both a physical notebook and a directory of Markdown files in
a GitHub repository to take notes. When I have ideas while away from computer, I
will write them down and edit a Markdown file later. Otherwise, I will directly
open a Markdown file. The files are organized by dates, and they are listed as
individual sections in the Markdown file.

I found the combination works well. And I organize the
Markdown files in a static website so that I can even view them in a web
browser, which is a good-to-have feature that I did not use much.

What is new about the Zettelkasten, compared with what I have had, is two fold:
(1) the Zettelkasten system requires that notes must be linked, because unlinked
notes will be lost, and (2) the notes are not organized by dates, but they are
taken in a atomic and autonomous way, namely each note contains one and only one
idea. Nevertheless, I keep a diary, *i.e.* a new Markdown file everyday, that
links to ideas that I had or I learned on that day.

There are many ways to do this. I am using the simplest tools that I know:
Markdown, the `vim` editor, the [`vimwiki`](https://github.com/vimwiki/vimwiki)
and [`vim-zettel`](https://github.com/michal-h21/vim-zettel) plug-ins for `vim`,
and a GitHub repository. That's it.

So far I *feel* intrigued about the Zettelkasten system, though due to the short
time of using it, I cannot tell how beneficial it can be in the long run. I am
cautiously positive, because the habit of taking notes in the last two years
already helped me in one or another situation re-visit some old ideas and
connect apparently distant ideas. I am glad to share what I learn in a future
post.

## Zettelkasten as a learning tool

Many people who used Zettelkasten reported positive experience, especially with
regard to learning (survivor bias though may apply as well). I consider
*learning things* as a process of acquiring the ability to *explaining them to
others*, where *others* can be either humans, in which case the explanation is
done by language and gestures, or computers, in which case the explanation is
done by programming languages and workflows (here I am influenced by [Donald
Knuth]({% post_url 2020-05-15-dw-2020KW20 %})). Taking notes of ideas of either
people or of our own, especially in our own language, is not only a tool to pin
vague ideas down, but also an attempt to explain them to *ourselves*.

If I use my own language instead of copy/paste when taking the notes, and have a
learner as a virtual reader in mind, the process even simulates a teaching
experience where I try to explain an idea to someone who is new to it. It can be
seen as an implementation of [the Feynman's
Technique](https://fs.blog/2012/04/feynman-technique/), which proposes that a
good way to learn a topic is to (pretend to) teach it to a kid in the elementary
school, identify things that you cannot explain well, understand them better
with the help of textbooks and other resources, and finally review and simply
the message.

I like to image this process of acquiring knowledge and conveying key messages
to other people or machines as &lsquo;*the metabolism of knowledge*&rsquo;.  It
is also used by popular tips about learning, for instance the *drilldown method*
proposed by [Scott
Young](https://www.calnewport.com/blog/2012/10/26/mastering-linear-algebra-in-10-days-astounding-experiments-in-ultra-learning/),
who proposes a three-step process of learning: first a wide coverage of the
topic, then dedicated practice with feedback and proper granularity, and finally
distilling insights, for instance with the Feynman's Technique.

No matter what the name is, the key insight is that we cannot only only *collect
knowledge*, because otherwise we fall into the *collector's fallacy*, the tendency
of collecting things and feeling good about the mere action of action, though
even without benefiting from the collections (more about this in [this post in
Zettelkasten.de](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/collectors-fallacy)). Taking
notes in our own languages and link them help absorb the knowledge instead of
hoarding them.

## Zettelkasten for resonance in an accelerating world

Beyond the apparent benefit for learning, I consider note taking and knowledge
digestion as a way to resonate with both people and ideas in an accelerating
world. I was inspired to take this view by reading the book [*Beschleunigung --
Die Veränderung der Zeitstrukturen in der
Moderne*](https://www.suhrkamp.de/buecher/beschleunigung-hartmut_rosa_29360.html)
(*Alienation and Acceleration: Towards a Critical Theory of Late-modern
Temporality*) by Hartmut Rosa, a sociologist, and his another book [*Resonanz -
Eine Soziologie der
Weltbeziehung*](https://www.suhrkamp.de/buecher/resonanz-hartmut_rosa_29872.html).
His theories and arguments left a strong impression on how I see myself and the
world develop.

The key insights I gained by reading both books is that acceleration, let it be
technological, social, and of our own life, has become an end in itself.
Individual efforts to resist acceleration will largely fail, since it is the
imperative of the system that we handle faster and accelerate processes whenever
it is possible. To live a good life in such a society, besides pushing for
changes on the system level, we need to take conscious decisions to resonate
with ourself and with the world. I see a parallel thread between the *resonance
theory* of Hartmut Rosa and the concept of [*Das Passende
Leben*](https://www.remo-largo.ch/passende-leben.html) proposed by Remo Largo, a
Swiss pediatrician and scientist.

## Conclusions

The idea of *Discovery Weekly* was born during the corona pandemic. It helped me
collect and share what I see and learn every week. It helped me find writing as
a way of thinking. I am honoured that many colleagues and friends read the
*Discovery Weekly* series in the last three months, and offered both feedback and
criticism, which are immensely valuable to me.

Now, with the new goal of metabolizing and linking knowledge, instead of merely
collecting them, the *Discovery Weekly* will hopefully be transformed, in the
time domain, into writings with more insights and depth. Thanks to the discovery
of the *Zettelkasten* system, I think I have found a promising road to achieve the
goal. What left is hard work and persistence. May the curiosity and courage be
with me.

Have a nice weekend!

## Resources about *Zettelkasten*:

* [Zettelkasten on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zettelkasten)
* [Zettelkasten.de](https://zettelkasten.de/)
* [Gregor Sturm's blog post about
  Zettelkasten](https://grst.github.io/projects/2020/06/15/hello-zettelkasten.html)
