---
layout: post
title: Nonviolent communication
category: Book
---

I finished the book *Nonviolent communication* (the 3rd edition) by Marshall B.
Rosenberg this week. Here are my learning notes.

* TOC
{:toc}

## The principles of nonviolent communication

The author introduces the nonviolent communication (NVC) as a four-step
process:

1. We **observe** and **describe** the concrete actions that affect our
   well-being.
1. We **name** and **share** our feeling we have in relation to what we
   observe.
1. We **identify** and **communicate** the needs, values, desires, *etc.* that
   create our feelings.
1. We **decide** and **request** concrete actions in order to enrich our lives.

The process roots in empathy, respect, and tenderness with others and with
ourselves. It rejects moralistic judgements, comparisons, or evaluation.

### Observations

When we observe and describe to others our observations, it is necessary to
separate them from evaluations. If we mix observations with evaluations, others
tend to hear criticism. Instead of static generalizations, describe specific
observations specific to time and context. For instance, instead of saying
&ldquo;Tony is a good team player&rdquo;, we can say &ldquo;Tony helped other
members of the team by sharing his experience.&rdquo;

### Feelings

The second component is to express our feelings clearly and specifically. It is
important to distinguish between expression of feeling and thoughts,
assessments, and interpretations. For instance, instead of saying “I am not a
good piano player", we can say &ldquo;I am annoyed/impatient/frustrated with myself
that I cannot play piano well&rdquo;.

A simple way to check whether we have expressed our feelings is to use a
sentence of the form &ldquo;I feel this because *I* &hellip;&rdquo;, and to refrain
from using &ldquo;I feel this because *you* &hellip;&rdquo;. While the first sentence
expresses *my* feelings, the second sentence expresses rather my *judgement*
and is almost certainly interpreted as criticism.

As a foreign-language speaker, I find it challenging to build a vocabulary of
feelings that express nuisances. I searched around for tools and found the two
pictures particularly helpful for me.

The first one lists words expressing feelings and emotions with emojis. There
are several versions of it. The one that I include here was (apparently)
proposed by the National Institute of Corrections of the United States. I
discovered it on
[Pinterest](https://www.pinterest.com/pin/501095896011720377/).

![How do you feel today? A collection of words expressing emotions, proposed by
National Institute of
Corrections](/assets/images/how_do_you_feel_today_NIC.jpg){:.center-image}

The other one was based on data derived from psychology research, projecting
words expression feelings and emotions by dimension reduction. Source: Scherer,
Klaus R. [“What Are Emotions? And How Can They Be
Measured?”](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0539018405058216) Social Science
Information 44, no. 4 (December 2005): 695–729, Figure 1.

![Dimensional structures of the semantic space for
emotions](/assets/images/Scherer-dimensional-structures-of-space-for-emotions.png){:.center-image}

A [more recent publication](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02024.x)
even maps words in higher six dimensions by using among others principal
component analysis. Nevertheless, for my purpose of finding an appropriate
word to express myself, the 2D plot above suffices.

### Needs

Stoic philosophers like Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius remind us that what
others say and do may be the stimulus for, but never the cause of, our
feelings. Our own needs, desires, and values cause our feelings.

When we communicate with others and hear negative comments, we have four
options: (1) blame ourselves, (2) blame others, (3) sense our own feelings and
needs, and (4) sense the feelings and needs hidden in other person's negative
comments. Try to avoid (1) and (2) and exercise and get more muscle in (3) and
(4).

Judgements, criticisms, diagnoses, and interpretations of others can be seen as
alienated expression of our own needs and values. When others hear criticism,
they tend to invest their energy in self-dense and counter-attack. It helps
others to communicate compassionately if we connect our feelings to our needs.

Finally, keep in mind that we can never meet our own needs at the expense of
others.

### Requests

The fourth component of NVC is to communicate what we would to request of each
other to enrich each of our lives. Generalized, vague or ambiguous words should
be replaced by actionable, concrete words. For instance, instead of saying
&ldquo;Mary please take care of your sister&rdquo;, we may say &ldquo;Mary, will
please help your sister wear her shoes?&rdquo; The clearer we are about what we
want back, the more likely that we will get it.

We have to make sure that the audience of our requests perceive them indeed as
requests, not as demands or blames. And we must make sure that get the request
accurately, for instance by asking them paraphrase or rephrase it.

## The role of empathy

Empathy is an understanding of what others are experiencing. When we hear
others, we tend to give advices or reassurance or to rush to own position or
our feelings. Empathy, on the other hand, calls us to empty our mind and listen
to others with the whole being.

No matter what words others may use to express themselves, we should try to
simply listen for their observations, feelings, needs, and requests. Then we may
reflect, paraphrasing what we have understood in the same four-step
process described above and using a positive language. We stay in this empathy
state and allow others the opportunity to fully express them before turning our
attention to requests or solutions.

An important lesson I learned many times by hard lessons is that I need empathy
in order to give it. When I am in a bad physical condition, when I am
irritated, or when I am in a hurry, I cannot give sufficient empathy others
need.

I am now learning to sense the 'empathy battery' in myself, and check whether I
am defensive or unable to empathize, In case the battery is nearly empty, I can
take time out, breath deeply and give myself empathy, or scream non-violently b
strictly following the observations-feeling-needs-and-requests rule. The
[&lsquo;RAIN principle&rsquo;]({% post_url
2020-04-21-mental-health-during-corona %}) (recognize, accept, investigate, and
nourish) may also help here.

In that aspect, we can use the NVC techniques to keep empathy for ourselves.
When we fail or make mistakes, we can use the process of NVC to mourn and
forgive ourselves, and to show ourselves where we can grow. By assessing my
unmet needs and making specific requests to make them met, we can contribute to
the life of our own and of others.

In the same line, self-compassion means that I choose in daily life consciously
to act only to meet my own needs and values rather than out of duty, for
extrinsic rewards, or to avoid punishment. Put in an extreme, *do only things
that means playing for me*.

I experienced the relief several times before when I realised that things that
I thought I *have to* do in fact can be done by others, who enjoy doing them
(at least more than I do) and do them probably better. Instead of following
these have-to-dos, I can focus on what I *choose to* do. I resonate the author
when he found out, for instance, that he can live much better without writing
clinical report that he thought he had to write - with fewer income, but higher
life satisfaction in general.

I believe that once we weight the investment (previous time and life for
instance) and the return (money, power, *etc.*) of things that we do, often we
can make better, informed decisions that enrich our life.

## Expressing anger

We can follow five steps to express anger:

1. Stop and breathe,
1. Identify my judgemental thoughts,
1. Connect with my needs,
1. Empathize with the other person so that he or she will hear me, and
1. Express my feelings and unmet needs

## Solving conflicts

As a parent of two children, I have to solve conflicts from time to time. What
I learned from the NYC technique is that I can concentrate on identifying the
needs of both parties at the first place, instead of paying attention to the
details of the conflict first. Only when I am sure that I understand all needs
well, I should start looking for strategies to fulfil these needs.

During the process, I should not judge or analyse the conflict, however
tempting that is. Instead, I remain focused on needs. And I do not hear "no" as
a rejection, but rather as an expression of needs that keep the person from
saying "yes".

## Appraisal and appreciation

NYC encourages the expression of appreciation solely for celebration, instead
of influencing or manipulating the behaviour of others.

We state three things if we want to appraise someone: the action, the need, and
the feelings. For instance, instead of saying &ldquo;Markus you are such a helpful
boy!&rdquo;, we can say &ldquo;Markus you brought the tools to me when I needed it
urgently. That makes me proud.&rdquo;

## Conclusions

I enjoyed the book. I am trying to implement some techniques into my daily
life. In some cases, it indeed helped me and others by exposing mutual emotions
and feelings to each other. In more cases, I still fail living up to all the
requirements and principles of NYC. The bottom line, however, is that now I
realize that I have a choice to do it better next time.

When I think of the many great friends, colleagues, and mentors that I have and
appreciate, almost all of them master one or the other aspect of nonviolent
communication. The people I cherish observe carefully, articulate their
feelings and needs without making moralistic judgement or being negative or
pessimistic, and make clear and specific requests that help both them and me.
They are living examples that I can learn from.

The book complements the book *How to Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids
Will Talk* by Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish. While this book of NYC does not
focuses on parenting only, the techniques are actually well embodied in the
other book. After all, the needs of children are in many ways identical to
those of adults. Therefore, both books are worth reading, especially for parents.

The many poems and lyrics by the author and Ruth Bebermeyer, a colleague of
him, added human touch and rhythmic beauty to the book. The language was clear,
concise, and humorous. The message of empathy, collaboration, authenticity and
freedom, which are printed on the cover of the 3rd edition that I read, is well
received.

