---
layout: post
title: A fresh look at tumour and immune-system dynamics in lung cancer
category: Biology
---

*Nature* published [a collection of
papers](https://www.nature.com/collections/haffgaicaf) reporting the *TRACERx
study*. It was set up in 2014 to study cancer dynamics and immune system changes
during development of lung cancer.

## High-level outcome of the study

The studies published so far share the results of analysing the first 100
samples of the cohort.

A [comment article](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01347-z) by the
chief scientist leading the project, Charles Swanton, summarized main outcomes
of the project:

* Whole genome duplications are common in lung cancer tumours. Point mutations
    are also common. They are caused by tobacco exposure and the activity of
    cytidine deaminases, which deactivate invading viruses as part of the immune
    response.
* Among smokers, whole genome duplications take place early. Mutations
    associated with smoking dominate the trunk of the tumour’s evolutionary
    tree. They are called *founder mutations* or *truncal mutations*, which
    means that they are likely present in most tumour cells.
* DNA sequences of T-cell receptors evolved parallel with the tumour. The tumor
    eventually adapts to its immune environment and avoids destruction. A
    possible explanation is that the chromosomal instability of tumour cells
    cause them to lose immune-recognition molecules known as human leukocyte
    antigen (HLA) on their surface, which prevents T cells from homing in on the
    tumour.

For clinicians, the study reveals potential benefit of computer tomography (CT)
screening (reduction of mortality rate from 3.3 deaths per 1,000 person-years to
2.5 deaths). Personalized treatment may improve prognosis, for instance, some
patients (5-15 out of 100) will benefit from chemotherapy after surgery.
Currently, though, we cannot predict who benefit from it most. Detection of
circulating free DNA that contains founder (truncal) mutations may be used to
identify this sub-population, based on the hypothesis that chemotherapy benefits
patients with tumour DNA in their blood after surgery most.

From the drug discovery perspective, it may be necessary to target multiple
cancer proteins carrying founder mutations at the same time with
immunotherapies.

## A skewed distribution of CD4 and CD8 T cells in lung cancer

Colleagues interested in T cells may find the following publication interesting,
which use material from the TRACERx cohort. [Ghorani *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43018-020-0066-y) share on *Nature
Cancer* a comprehensive characterization of CD4 (including immature and mature
helper T cells) and CD8 (including immature and mature cytotoxic T cells) in
non-small cell lung cancer, using flow cytometry, exome sequencing, single-cell
sequencing, and bulk sequencing.

They show that tumour mutation burden was associated with changes T cell
differentiation and composition, characterized by loss of TCF7-expressing
progenitor-like CD4 T cells, and an increased abundance of dysfunctional CD4 and
CD8 T cells that resemble neoantigen-recative CD8 T cells. The shift of
distribution was associated with poor survival in lung and other cancer cohorts
with gene signature analysis.

## Conclusions

Understanding the diseases dynamics and the co-evolution of both disease and the
immune system is a fascinating topic. I think it remains a challenge to identify
from the many different types of changes that we observe the causal nodes or
links of interaction networks that we can target as drug targets, and show that
the therapeutics are efficacious and safe.

Studies like TRACERx defnitely enriches
our knowledge in this aspect. Now it is the turn of the community, including
biopharmaceutical companies, to turn the knowledge and insight into drugs and
therapeutics. The founder mutations, for instance, seem to be particularly
interesting. What happens if we remove cells harbouring them? Will other
mutations appear that escape immunotherapy? I am excited to see the progress in
this field.

More broadly, I wish we as a community have more resources like TRACERx for
other diseases, especially neurodegenerative diseases, infectious diseases, and
autoimmune diseases. I believe patient-specific and targeted therapeutics can be
made by understanding how the immune system co-evolute with the disease,
especially when part of it is causing the disease.
