---
layout: post
title: Intrisincally disodered regions in transcription factors
category: Genomics
---

It is long known that transcription factors (TFs) which bind to common DNA
motifs *in vitro* occupy distinct sets of promoters *in vivo*. The reason for
that is not clear. A new study may provide some hints. Spoiler warning: it
involves intrisincally disordered regions.

[Brodsky *et
al.*](https://www.cell.com/molecular-cell/fulltext/S1097-2765%2820%2930352-X)
reports in *Molecular Cell* their study of Msn2 and Yap1, two TFs of different
families that contain long intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) outside their
DNA-binding domains. They found that the IDRs are both necessary and sufficient
for localizing TFs to the majority of target promoters. They found that
IDR-mediated binding does not dependent on any single localized domain in the
IDR, but rather results from a multitude of weak determinants distributed
throughout the entire IDR sequence.

Therefore, the authors proposes a two-step search model of TF-promoter binding:
first IDR recognizes promoters via multiple weak interactions, and then
DNA-binding domain binds to its preferential motif to regulate gene
transcription.

{% include image.html
url="https://marlin-prod.literatumonline.com/cms/attachment/6f9ff4f2-c496-4086-b49c-bfa1ca5e637d/fx1.jpg"
description="Graphic abstract of the paper by Brodsky et al."
%}

The results are on one side not really surprising, but nevertheless reassuring
and interesting, in the sense that non-DNA binding domains must somehow
contribute to the promoter-specificity of TFs. On the other side, they are
indeed intriguing that the intrinsic disordered regions contribute to promoter
selective consistently and substantially in two transcription factors.

I think the results are even more intriguing because [*de Boer* et
al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-019-0315-8) reported their findings
from 100 million random promoters that expression level is influence by weak
regulatory interactions between TFs and promoter sequences. Are we looking at
two levels of weak interactions - between IDR and promoter sequences, and
between different TFs and promoter sequences - or just one level? I have no
clear answer yet.

In any case, these studies seem to suggest that weak interactions between TF and
promoter sequences matter.

