---
layout: post
title: A SPARK for therapeutic pathway hunting
category: DrugDiscovery
tags: SPARK
---

In [Roudnicky *et al.* (PNAS 2020)](https://www.pnas.org/content/117/33/19854),
we reported how we identified inducers of the endothelial cell barrier, among
others by using the **SPARK** (**S**mall-molecule **PA**thway **R**esearch
**K**it) library and genome-edited endothelial cells derived from human
pluripotent stem-cells.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Some biological background

If you have not heard of endothelial cells,  they form the inner surface of
blood vessels and lymphatic vessels as a cell monolayer. Endothelial cells are
involved in many biological processes, including blood clotting, inflammation,
formation and growth of new blood vessels (known as *angiogenesis*), and
regulation of blood pressure.

A speciality of endothelial cells is that they can form tight barriers, known as
*endothelial barriers*, that control the flow of substances, fluid, and immune
cell into and out of a tissue. In particular, the blood-retinal barrier (often
abbreviated as BRB) and blood-brain barrier (BBB) contain endothelial cells
which let selected molecules but not others pass through. In addition to usual
functions of endothelial cells, they support and protect cells in the central
nervous system. Therefore, it may not surprise you that impaired integrity of
these barriers and malfunction of endothelial cells can cause many diseases or
contribute to disease progression.

## A phenotypic screening to identify pathways regulating endothelial cells

How can we develop drugs to improve the integrity of endothelial barriers? The
first hurdle is to identify genes and biological pathways that regulate the
barrier forming function of endothelial cells, and second is to find out against
which targets can we develop drugs to modulate their function. To address both
questions at the same time, we can screen many compounds with annotated target
and pathway-regulation profiles with a endothelial-cell-based phenotypic assay.
That is exactly what we did.

Why did we setup a phenotypic screening? When the biological system that we want
to model is complex (for instance endothelial cells in our case) and when we
want to identify novel regulators of the biological system, cell-based
phenotypic screening is probably an better approach than a biochemical assay
which focuses on one particular target that we assume is important for the
system. Compared with biochemical assays, a robust and well-designed cell-based
assay can reveal effects of pharmaceutical intervention in cells, which better
models the situation where drugs enter in our body and reach the cells. At the
same time, cell-based phenotypic screening offers a higher throughput than *in
vivo* animal models. Human cell-based assays, in addition, may potentially
address human biology with reduced dependency on animal models.

In this study, we used stem-cell-derived endothelial cells as the cell system to
model endothelial-cell biology. These cells, even without genome editing,
already show endothelial-cell-like expression profiles and functions, which was
revealed among others by our analysis with the *BioQC* algorithm and a
comprehensive survey of the FANTOM5 database ([see details in the supplementary
information](https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/suppl/2020/08/04/1911532117.DCSupplemental/pnas.1911532117.sapp.pdf)).
Furthermore, we used the genome-editing technique to modify the cells so that
they report the abundance of Claudin-5, the protein encoded by gene *CLDN5*. The
edited *CLDN5* gene is coupled with a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter,
so that the cells with higher expression of CLDN5 protein emit brighter green
fluorescent when exposed to light in the blue to ultraviolet range. We used the
reporter as the readout of our phenotypic screening, because *CLDN5* has been
found to stabilizes endothelial cells, and we believe that its expression is
correlated with and mechanistically linked with the protective function of
endothelial cells. Using flow cytometry, we could identify drug-like molecules
that induce *CLDN5* expression, which, if further validated, hopefully improve
the protective function of endothelial cells in blood-retinal and blood-brain
barriers.

But what chemical molecules do we want to screen with and test on these cells?
There are millions of compounds that have been synthesized and reported in
public and proprietary databases, and many more compounds can be at least
theoretically constructed - the potential number of drug-like molecules far
exceeds the total number of atoms in the universe. How can we select a compact
set of molecules, which is nevertheless comprehensive with regard to their
biological spaces and pathway regulation patterns, in order to identify genes
and pathways that are putative therapeutic starting points?

## The SPARK library

To address this challenge, we combined data, prior knowledge, and data analysis
to construct the SPARK library. The workflow of construction and the benchmark
results can be found in the Figure 2 of the paper. In short, we integrated
high-quality compound-activity-target data from *ChEMBL*, a public database, and
Roche's proprietary database. By using *Gini Index*, a metric to quantify the
specificity of compound against targets (which we also used in our *BioQC*
software), and by using Affinity propagation (AP), an unsupervised
machine-learning algorithm, we identified compounds that are specific, potent,
and representative with regard to their biological targets. We further manually
curated the list and annotated the compounds with biological pathways. The
result is SPARK, a pathway-annotated chemogenomic library with about
two-thousand small molecules.

## The screening and RepSox, an interesting hit

Now we have a cell system ready for screening and a chemogenomic-library with
small molecules associated with target genes and pathways, we can use them to
identify small molecules and targets that modulate Claudin-5, our molecular
phenotypic marker of endothelial cell integrity. The screening may sound less
glamorous than building a genome-edited reporter cell system or constructing a
new chemogenomic library, but in fact it is at least equally important as other
activities, because its quality directly determines what we can get for further
study.

Thanks to detail-oriented work by the team, we identified 62 compounds that
activated CLDN5. Interestingly, several hits that we found are TGF-beta pathway
inhibitors. While it has been long suspected that the TGF-beta pathway is
involved in modulating endothelial cell integrity, few results are available to
reveal the causal link between the two, and little is known about the biological
effect and the therapeutic potential of modulating the TGF-beta pathway in
retinal endothelial cells with small molecules.

Further work revealed that RepSox, a TGF-beta pathway inhibitor, elevated
resistance of endothelial barriers in primary retinal and brain endothelial
cells. It also reduces para-cellular permeability and prevented barrier breakdown
induced by vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) *in vitro*. In animal
models, it altered vascular patterning in the mouse retina during
development.

Further studies of RepSox to reveal its activities against kinases (*kinome
profiling*), gene expression profiles (*transcriptome profiling*), and protein
expression and post-translation modulation profiles (*proteome profiling*)
revealed that RepSox inhibits several biological pathways besides TGF-beta,
especially downstream pathways of VEGFA and inflammation gene networks. At the
same time, it activates Notch and Wnt pathways, which are believed to stabilize
vasculature and to promote the establishment of endothelial barriers, while
inducing individual tight junctions and transporters. In short, RepSox modulates
endothelial cells by targeting multiple pathways.

## My learnings

Put together, the results suggest that inhibiting multiple pathways may be an
effective strategy for the development of better endothelial-cell-barrier models
and new therapeutics that induce endothelial-cell barriers. From a
drug-discovery perspective, the study suggests that it is feasible to discover
target genes and pathways by screening relevant *in vitro* cell systems with
pathway-annotated small-molecule libraries such as SPARK. Personally, I was
particularly excited by learning more about the endothelial biology in a team
that include experts in stem-cell technology, genome editing, phenotypic
screening, omics, and data analysis.

A few studies in the recent years have described new chemogenomic library sets,
in particular those from the BROAD institute ([The Drug Repurposing
Hub](http://www.nature.com/nm/journal/v23/n4/full/nm.4306.html?foxtrotcallback=true)),
Cancer Research UK ([The Probe
Miner](http://www.cell.com/cell-chemical-biology/abstract/S2451-9456(17)30421-X)),
Novartis ([Systematic Chemogenomic Library
Assembly](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.017244v1)), and
other ongoing efforts like [Open Access Chemogenomics Library and Chemical
Probes for the Druggable
Genome](https://www.imi.europa.eu/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/apply-for-funding/future-topics/FutureTopic_chemogenomics.pdf).
In our manuscript, we also share with the community how we constructed the SPARK
library and how its application helped us gain new insights in endothelial cell
biology. While chemogenomic libraries with pathway annotation are not silver
bullets to solve all problems in drug discovery, if used wisely and
appropriately, they can help identify new and sometimes unexpected targets and
pathways.

Finally, our work complements [a recent publication by Ietswaart *et al.* on
EBioMedicine](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352396420302127),
which is co-authored by colleagues at Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research
and academic partners, which uses compound-target-activity data and adverse drug
reaction (ADR) data to associate drug targets with adverse effects. Though the
scope, data source, and methodologies of both studies are distinct, they both
suggest that *in vitro* pharmacology data can be used to address
safety and efficacy questions of future drugs. We can probably learn how to
develop new drugs more effectively by understanding our established drugs better.


