---
layout: post
title: Internship project on graph neural network and causal inference
category: Career
---

We offer a 9-month internship. The project aims at combining graph neural
networks and causal inference to address diverse problems in computational
biology.

Graph neural networks and causal inferences represent two state-of-the-art
approaches to connectionist and symbolic learning. Graph neural networks, based
on knowledge encoded in graphs and neural networks, are powerful tools for
knowledge injection in machine learning and for representation learning (see the
previous post [on using knowledge-graph for patient-level data]({% post_url
2022-01-23-knowledge-graphs-with-patient-level-data %})). Causal inference,
based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and statistical models, is a powerful to
discern causal effects from correlations caused by confounding (see [a tutorial
here on GitHub](https://github.com/Accio/causal_drug_discovery)).

Our research question is whether we can find a *midway* that combines the
advantages of both approaches - powerful prediction on the one hand,
interpretability and counterfactual queries on the other hand - to predict and
to understand mechanism and safety profiles of drugs. The premise is that drugs
exert their efficacy and invoke adverse effects by interacting with and
modulating targets and off-targets, which are components of biological networks.
By combining our limited knowledge of biological networks and observational
data, we wish to gain a better understanding of how and why drugs induce certain
phenotypes by leveraging both computational approaches.

We welcome motivated bachelor or master students to apply. The internship starts
latest in July and lasts 9 months. Please apply [here on
careers.roche.com](https://careers.roche.com/global/en/job/202203-111835/Internship-for-Computational-Toxicology-and-Safety) or here on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/internship-for-computational-toxicology-and-safety-at-roche-2985439654).
