---
layout: single
title: >- 
    David's Discoveries Weekly (April 20-27, 2020)
category: 
  - David's Discoveries Weekly 
---

Here are the things I discovered this week that fascinates me.

## Computer science

### Mapping three decades of intellectual change in academia

The paper by Daniel Ramage *et al.* was discovered from WeChat ID [科研圈](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/r7zIR77_XGzuG-9Sa24sdQ) and the paper appears on [arxiv.org](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.01291). The authors used a statistical model to analyse dissertation abstracts to uncover the hidden relationships between academic disciplines and how they have changed over the last three decades.

An interesting question that the authors tried to address is how one scientific
field affects another, for instance computer science on genetics. To quantify
this, the authors developed a measure of *language incorporation*: which words
in each dissertation can be attributed to which source areas in academia?

About methodology: the authors associated the words in each dissertation
abstract with their most similar area by using Partially Labelled Dirichlet
Allocation (PLDA), a Bayesian statistical text mining approach developed and
published by the authors in 2011 based on earlier statistical topic models.

An interesting finding of the authors (though not necessarily surprising): among
the subjects, the highest exporting areas tend to be methodological or concern
abstract reasoning: mathematics, philosophy, computer science, and statistics.
Where as mathematics and philosophy present a fundamental form of knowledge with
direct applicability in other fields, the authors found that computer science
and statistics are coming to inhabit a similarly central role. The authors
explained their observation by that contemporary science and engineering become
ever more data driven, and therefore fields that enable the collection,
processing, and interpretation of large datasets are becoming more important.

Another interesting finding is that biological sciences still morrow more
language from other areas compared with other areas. And the split of biology is
an interesting observation. According to the authors: 'the majority of the field
of biology is now linked to reductionist approaches and applications in
medicine, while ecology and evolutionary biology has nearly split off into ...
environmental studies ... in the earth and agricultural sciences."

The authors used the example of computational biology to illustrate their points
about new fields and asymmetric flow of language between fields. I am very
fortunate to work in this new interdisciplinary area. On the other hand, I ask
myself whether it is possible, and if so, how to bring languages in biology into
other areas. Another question I have is how scientists experience the flow
between languages and methods between subjects, whether the experience is
consistent with findings from dissertation abstracts, and what are the
implications for scientific communication, including communication within the
field, communication with decision makers, and public communication. Last not
least, the method of [PLDA](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2020408.2020481), a
supervised generative model, can be interesting for tagged data. 
