---
layout: single
title: Postdoc in industrial research - why should you do it?
category: career
tags: industrial postdoc
---

Recently, a PhD student asked me for advantages and disadvantages of doing a postdoc in a company compared with doing a postdoc in academia. Since the question may also interest other students or researchers who face the decision, I want to share my thoughts here.

I believe that it is worth to do a postdoc in industrial research, both professionally and personally. It can be a rewarding step in your career as long as you are aware of what will expect you.

I write this piece with quite some bias. I joined industry directly after PhD study, therefore I have never been a postdoc either in academia or in industry. Though the first two years of my work in the industry is more of an exploratory nature, it was partly thanks to the vision that my mentors had and partly due to chance. After all, I was not hired as a postdoc and instead supposed to support projects right away. Besides, my knowledge about postdoc positions in academia is even more limited. My experience comes mostly from interactions with postdocs wwhom I worked with before I joined the industry, academic collaborators since then, and people who have done a academic postdoc and then joined industry. My knowledge of either academic or industrial postdoc positions is, therefore, second hand and incomplete at its best. 

On the other side, many postdoc fellows that I have collaborated with, either working in academia or in industry, have confided me with many thoughts, experiences, and reflections. Academia or industry, they have both success stories and confusions as well as frustrations. It is my privilege to listen to and learn from so many enthusiastic, talented, and hard-working scientists. I feel obliged to synthesize my thoughts with their inputs on this topic and put them down.

# Benefits of doing a postdoc in industry

There are many reasons speaking for doing a postdoc in industry. Below are the ones that I found appealing to most people that I know.

Let us start with your long-term goal. If you can imagine putting your knowledge and skills in an industrial setting, doing a postdoc there is a good start. 

What happens if your answer to the question is 'I do not know'? This is okay. After all, most students have no or little experience with research in industry, unless they have worked in the industry or were deeply involved in academie-industrial collaborations. Postdoc, being a temporary position, offers fresh PhD students both an opportunity to get first-hand experience with industrial research and time to take decisions. The only way to find the answer to the question above is to give it a try. 

Then there are students who have long determined to apply their abilities in industry. They may have made this decision based on experience or considerations: better working conditions in general, direct impact that they may have, more acceptance for work-life balance, less focus on paper writing and grant applications, *etc.*. For them, a postdoc position offers a reality check of their ideals: are the working conditions indeed better? Is the expected impact reachable and satisfactory? Is the work-life balance really better than in the academia environment? Is one satisfied with the fact that not all finding can be shared with a wide community in a timely manner? These aspects vary between one company and another, and the experience of one person may differ from that of another one. Nevertheless, a postdoc in industry can either confirm your expectations or challenge it, in either case enriching your experience and broadening your horizon. A postdoc in industry is not unlike a honeymoon: one is still under hormones, but at least quite some unrealistic expectations will be smoothed out, while unexpected joy and frustrations may bring new insights.

Even if your long-term goal is to build expertise and career in an academic setting, a postdoc in industry may do you unexpected good. My personal experience is that the postdoc experience in industry can help you to build a comprehensive view of the practical side of your discipline, and its connections to other disciplines. 

In industrial research, the chance that one discipline generating all research products, which translate into revenues and profits, dwindles to near zero. Take drug discovery as example: the list of disciplines that contribute to a new drug is long: biology, chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology, molecular modelling, computational biology, bioinformatics, statistics, modelling and simulation, ... . As a postdoc in industry, you will for sure dive deep into your discipline. At the same time, you will be certainly exposed to other aspects of research that are at least as exciting, interesting, and important as your own field. 

Being informed about the existence and importance of related fields, and the unique contribution of own research, is an important plus for a postdoc position in industry. In a minimum, being informed about the state-of-the-art of your discipline and other disciplines helps you to identify significant questions that will have impacts, and to come up with solutions that are more likely to be practical and impactful.

It is not to say that postdocs in academia are not informed about related fields. In contrast, quite a few interesting academic postdoc projects that I know are in fact results of interdisciplinary collaborations. The major difference between industry and academia lies in the incentives: while industrial research puts investment return at the first place and therefore value practical innovations that may turn into revenue and profit, academic research is sometimes deemed as 'pure', driven by interest, and awarded mainly by publications, grants, and permanent positions. Given that a complex product can hardly be produced by experts from one discipline, whereas a immortal paper or a distinguishing career as a professor can thrive on deep work in one area, industrial research is born more interdisciplinary.

Besides as a means to achieve your long-term goal, working as a postdoc also creates, shapes, and expands your personal network. The postdoc contract may have an end date, but the contact network does not cease to exist when you leave the company, or even when you stop working as a scientist. While you can also build a powerful network in academia, the industrial network, thanks to the collaborative and interdisciplinary nature, may consist of more diverse types of people with regard to their educational background, problem solving techniques, and life philosophy. A social network with industrial connections is not superior to a network with academic connections when it comes to help you get out another big paper or a prestigious grant. Nevertheless, it may provide you an alternative view of work and life, which can be sometimes refreshing or thought-provoking.

# Considerations before committing to a postdoc position in industry

A postdoc in industry demands not only excellence in your own field. It also challenges you to communicate with experts from other fields and even to influence them. The goal is not confined to publish papers or to get grants, but also to do convincing work that inspire others - not only your peers, but also experts in other fields, including scientists, managers, or investors (which happens more often in a smaller company than a bigger one). Are you a computational biologist? Okay, you do not stop when you develop a new algorithm or model to explain things. You strive to make predictions that wet-lab biologists and chemists that can test. Are you a biologist? Your goal is not only to describe and explain what you observe, but also to put that into the disease context and to suggest new therapies. In this process, the postdoc will inevitably interact with experts from other domains, explain them why his or own work matters, and persuade them why money should be put on the table to test the hypothesis. Therefore, if you decide to accept a industrial postdoc offer, you shoule be mentally prepared for the challenges you will face: besides being good (and more than that!) in your field and influence its development, you must interact with people from other fields, learn from them, and influence them as well as their fields as well. This can be demanding for graduate students, many of whom are trained to work in a different way. 

Again, this does imply that academic postdocs only focus on their own fields of research. Quite on the opposite, I personally know quite a few outstanding postdocs that outreach and collaborate beyond boundaries, who have a great impact in and beyond their field of research. I have little doubt that many of them can would do a great job in industry as well if they wish so and if they are given the chance. For newly graduated students, though, I wish to explicitly state the responsibility of doing a postdoc in industry so that you are prepared.

Working with interdisciplinary teams may lead you to ask yourself: what is the point of going so deep in my field? Does it matter at all? Some people may say: well, not that much. Other people will rather learn from the interactions exactly why their field is important, and go deeper into it with a stronger purpose and focus. Yet other people will spot the needs and gaps on the interfaces between disciplines, and develop new techniques, skills, and even new research areas - they often become giants in the field. Learning how to constantly learn new things, how to solve complex problems under practical constraints including time and budget, and how to being both an respectable scientist and a team player is utter important for postdoc work in industry. If you take the challenge seriously, you will probably question yourself regularly and critically: does what I do now matter? Can I make it matter more? I believe that we improve ourselves by by asking such questions and searching for answers by taking actions.

Besides scientific work, there is a social aspect of doing a postdoc in industry. In biology and relevant fields, many more researchers perform their postdoc work in academia than in industry. This may make it difficult for industrial postdocs to exchange experience and perspectives, both personal and scientific, with fellows. Luckily, though, there are more and more communities for postdocs and other junior researchers inside and between companies nowadays, so that an industrial postdoc does mean working in isolation. Nevertheless, more can done to promote scientific and personal exchange of industrial and academic postdocs.

I have met students who worry that their experience in industry may bring them unpleasant questions in future job interviews - 'Did you decide to join industry? Why do you now come back?'. I think there are two aspects here. In many cases, people are just curious - after all, most these interviewers are scientists, who are at least defined by their curiosity. In other cases, though, students worry that the questions are not free from a scrutinizing undertone. I do not know how often the latter case happens. I believe, however, that a capable candidate is welcome anywhere, whether she or he has been exclusively in academia or has switched between the sides.

# How should I decide?

You are welcome to expand the list of advantages and considerations above and modify it as you see fit. Use them to as information for decision making. Listen to yourself. Talk about your goals, wishes, questions, and worries with researchers with experience from either academia or industry. Make a decision. Go ahead. 

The postdoc is, after all, only one step in a long career. Even if it turns out to be a detour, you may take something useful and interesting from it. Much luck and success with your decision!
