---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 8 (June 1-7, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

Here are the things I discovered this week that fascinates me.

This week I recorded *Song at the Speyer Cathedral*, a piano solo piece composed David Nevue. I hope you enjoy it!

<iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" allow="autoplay" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/831809386&color=%23ff5500&auto_play=false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&show_reposts=false&show_teaser=true"></iframe><div style="font-size: 10px; color: #cccccc;line-break: anywhere;word-break: normal;overflow: hidden;white-space: nowrap;text-overflow: ellipsis; font-family: Interstate,Lucida Grande,Lucida Sans Unicode,Lucida Sans,Garuda,Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;font-weight: 100;"><a href="https://soundcloud.com/jdzhang" title="JDZhang" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">JDZhang</a> · <a href="https://soundcloud.com/jdzhang/song-at-the-speyer-cathedral" title="Song at the Speyer Cathedral" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">Song at the Speyer Cathedral</a></div>

<br/>
* TOC
{:toc}

## Drug discovery

### Drug discovery from the perspective of protein communities

Budayeva and Kirkpatrick published a review in *Nature Reviews Drug Discovery*,
[Monitoring protein communities and their reponses to
therapeutics](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41573-020-0063-y). They believe 
that mass spectrometry proteomics makes it possible to decipher complex
relations between communities of structural, metabolic, and signalling proteins,
and to understand how genetic and environmental factors influence the networks.

I understand the term &lsquo;protein communities&rsquo; as a generalized term of
gene-gene interaction, such as direct protein-protein interaction, two proteins
being co-regulated, or simply co-localized. The authors define a protein
community as *a set of proteins within a cell that are interconnected through
one or more physical, spatial, co-regulatory or functional relationships*.
Though apparently extracellular protein-protein interactions may be considered
as well.

The authors highlighted a few approaches for disease understanding and drug
discovery. They include affinity purification, proximity labelling, organelle
proteome profiling, PTM profiling, chemoaffinity enrichment, and thermal
proteome profiling.

* Affinity purification, also known as immunoaffinity purification, identifies
    protein interactions by antibody-mediated isolation of a target protein with
    its interaction partners.
* Proximity labelling, as its name suggests, labels a protein with a reactive
    substrate so that proteins in proximity are captured by affinity
    purification. It can capture transient and functional interactions.
* Organelle proteome profiling identifies spatial protein distribution and
    expression patterns of proteins enriched in organellar fractions.
* Post-transcriptional modification (PTM) profiling enriches and quantifies
    modified peptides (for instance phosphorylated peptides). It offers
    information of physical interaction, spatial interaction, and co-regulatory
    interaction.
* Chemoaffinity enrichment uses a chemical tool compound (for instance a kinase
    inhibitor) to profile biochemical activities of proteins in the presence and
    absence of a drug (for instance another kinase inhibitor of interest). The
    competitive binding of two compounds to proteins offers information about
    expression levels, activity, and affinity of an isolated enzyme for the
    drug.
* Thermal proteome profiling uses the fact that protein thermal stability
    changes upon configuration change induced by binding to specific binding
    partners such as small molecules. It can be used for target identification.

The authors believe that future progress is expected in *in vivo* proteomics,
automation, stoichiometric relationships between proteins, and improve proteomic
methods for low-level clinical samples. For drug discovery, connecting protein
communities with phenotypes is important, for instance by using proteomics to
understand the full sequence of events following target engagement and the
connections of these events to efficacy, adverse effects, and resistance.

## Biology

### Lessons learned from the TRACERx study

I share my learning notes [in another blog post]({% post_url
2020-05-30-TRACERx-100 %}).

### Flagship studies of the Genome Aggregation Database (genomAD)

*Nature* and other journals published a series of studies reporting the results
of analysing the [Genome Aggregation Database (genomAD)](https://www.nature.com/immersive/d42859-020-00002-x/index.html).

### RNA-guided endonucleases editting: decades of efforts tested in clinic

Bruce Sullenger published a brief review of the history and recent progress of
RNA-guided endonuclease (RGEN) editing of RNA and DNA, in particular its
application in the clinic.

## Programming

### 2020 Developer Survey by the Overflow

The high-level results are summarized at [The
Overflow](https://stackoverflow.blog/2020/05/27/2020-stack-overflow-developer-survey-results).
The breakdown results can be found
[here](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020).

My impressions

* I know practically nothing about the two most loved languages: Rust and
  TypeScript (well, beyond that it is typed JavaScript). Python comes as the
  third. Python comes as the third.   I am happy that I still have the chance to
  some lovely languages. Apparently [Rust is particularly interesting for system
  programming](https://stackoverflow.blog/2020/01/20/what-is-rust-and-why-is-it-so-popular/).
* About 70% responders are under 35. People seem to leave the field of
    programming as they age.
* People using Perl seem to earn much more (79k) than those using R or Python
    (57k and 59k). Experience and age is a confounding factor.
* Most responding people learn at least one new technologies a few months or a
  year.
* Over 80% responders are open to or interested in new job possibilities.
* From the numbers it seems that programmers working in mainland China may be
    under-represented.

### Tricks that I learned

* Uploading files to box.com: `curl -1 -v --disable-epsv --ftp-skip-pasv-ip -u
    YOURFULLEMAIL:YOURBOXPASSWORD --ftp-ssl --upload-file FILENAME
    ftp://ftp.box.com/`. Download files to box.com: `curl -1 -v --disable-epsv
    --ftp-skip-pasv-ip -u YOUREMAIL:YOURBOXPASSWORD --ftp-ssl
    ftp://ftp.box.com/FILENAMEONBOX -o FILENAMEONYOURLOCALFOLDER`. To list
    files, `curl -1 -v --disable-epsv --ftp-skip-pasv-ip -u
    YOUREMAIL:YOURBOXPASSWORD --ftp-ssl ftp://ftp.box.com`. I learned it from
    Marco Berrera.

## Statistics and machine learning

### Core progress in AI has stalled in some fields

Hutson summarized in a short article the observation that [core progress in AI
has stalled in some fields](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43018-020-0066-y).
Examples include neural-network pruning algorithms, information retrieval
system, loss function in image retrieval, adversarial training with projected
gradient descent, long-short term memory (LSTM) neural networks, and generative
adversarial networks (GANs).

My interpretation is that impactful innovation happens rarely. It can be sad and
frustrating for those who aim to develop a genuinely new algorithm that
transform how we analyse the data and the way we model the world. It can be
encouraging for those who wait a bit and use the best model available, which is
used by many but not all people, to get the best leverage of the technology.

I guess the return of investment of either following every new algorithm and
result, or not following any, is worse compared with the wait-observe-and-invest
approach.

## Other gems

* How to build a four-dimensional object in our 3D space? Connect each node to
    six neighbour nodes. What can you get? Apparently a [topological
    insulator](https://physicsworld.com/a/topological-insulators-enter-the-fourth-dimension).
* [GeoGebra](https://www.geogebra.org/) is a set of online apps for mathematics,
    geometry, and more. A new system under current development,
    [penrose](https://github.com/penrose/penrose), promises to create diagrams
    by typing mathematical notation in plain text. In a way, it is like LaTeX
    for visualization.


### Happiness and sadness, quantified

[Kettelwell *et
al.*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352827319302204)
reported in *SSM - Population Health* a cohort study of impact of major life
events, such as marriage, money gain, widowing, and separation, on cognitive and
affective well-being.

In this study, *Cognitive well-being* refers to overall life satisfaction. It
was obtained from the annual face-to-face interview using the response to the
question: &ldquo;All things considered, how satisfied are you with your
life?&rdquo;. The respondent was asked to pick a number between 0 (not
satisfied) and 10 (satisfied).

*Affective well-being* refers to the frequency and intensity with which people
experience positive affect and negative affect. It was quantified by questions
about positive and negative aspects of mental health, such as &ldquo;felt so
down in the dumps nothing could cheer me up&rdquo;, &ldquo;been happy&rdquo;),
and questions dealing with positive and negative aspects of vitality (e.g.,
&ldquo;feel full of life&rdquo;, &ldquo;felt worn out&rdquo;).

Interesting findings: against common assumptions,
promotion and being fired had little, if any, independent effect on well being,
while other events such as financial loss, death of partner, and childbirth have
profound impacts. Either positive or negative, the effect of most events wane
after two to four years time.

I think we have to interpret the data cautiously. For instance, it was reported
that the death of friends, on average, has little effect. The effect, though,
may between friends dramatically, because &lsquo;friends&rsquo; is a broad
category of people that we interact with.

Nevertheless, the findings remind us how to make better decisions about what to
invest in and spend time on. Family members and other loved ones, wealth ([not
money or status](https://nav.al/rich)), and health would, not surprisingly,
enrich the life of most people.

{%include image.html
url="/assets/images/20200529-kettlewell-Fig3.jpg"
description="Conditional effect of positive events on well-being, figure 3 of
Kettelwell et al., used under a Creative Commons license."
%}

{%include image.html
url="/assets/images/20200529-kettlewell-Fig4.jpg"
description="Conditional effect of negative events on well-being, figure 4 of
Kettelwell et al., used under a Creative Commons license."
%}

### No bullshit design thinking

1. Listen to what people *want* and make customer become the *king*.
1. The team defines *together* before creating anything.
1. Gather *ideas* how to implement a minimalistic product.
1. Build a *prototype* to show it to the team members and the customer.
1. Make people *test* the prototype and *iterate* and *refine*.

The five steps are also known as *Empathize*, *Define*, *Ideate*, *Prototype*,
*Test*.

### Music theory explained

I discovered videos of Karen Ramirez on YouTube, for instance [How to Make Chords from a Scale](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rt6zDOFNAdY) and [Chord Sequence 1 -6 -2 -5 -1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tdCZwxpPEZg). 

Karen Ramirez is a fantastic teacher who knows how to bring messages over. She is knowledgeable, enthusiatic, and she speak directly and explains well. I am learning both music theory and teaching from her.

I created a [play list](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzx9Jk87ZvDJxq3hxZ-Ju19n7oBxFmVyW) on YouTube that contains her videos that I still need to watch.

A related resource is a video (in Chinese) about the circle of fifth, which is available on [bilibili](https://www.bilibili.com/s/video/BV1Hb411j7aX). The cool thing: even a JavaScript-implementation of the Circle of Fifths is introduced, withe source code available at GitHub [wiwikuan/wiwi-circleOfFifths](https://github.com/wiwikuan/wiwi-circleOfFifths).

### The featureless pianist

I enjoyed the article by Alex Ross on the *New Yorker* magazine (May 18, 2020) on Igor Levit.

His friendship with Hannes Malte Mahler, a German artist, who died in a bicycle accident in 2016, impressed me mostly. Levit told Alex Ross: &ldquo;Accidentally or not, he always gave me the feeling that I am allowed to be who I am, without explaining or apologizing. I can just be.&rdquo; I know such people in my life, even more than one. I owe them all what I have.

Mahler's death shocked Levit. &ldquo;Aside from the loss, I had this sense that I had to go on even more with that process of taking away layers, discarding fears, letting myself be who I am. I really turned into a different person. No more bullshit.&rdquo; I am stunned, because I can not find a better description of my experience and my change after Clemens Broger left us in 2017.

Another point that impressed me was Igor Levit's feelings about being onstage, even when he was threatened because of his political standpoint. &ldquo;For me, the stage becomes the one place of freedom, absolute freedom. Nobody is bothering me, there are no phone calls, no interruptions. The worst thing that can happen, the worst thing possible, is a wrong note. Also, to hell with those people.&rdquo.

I thank Alex Ross for portraying the Levit who &lsquo;developed away from the spotlight&rsquo. And I appreciate that the possibility of reaching freedom Igor Levit shows me with his music, his words, and his human being.

The article can be found on [NewYorker.com](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2020/05/18/igor-levit-is-like-no-other-pianist), with a different title *Igor Levit is Like No Other Pianist*.

A song to kiss the night goodbye: [The People United Will Never Be Defeated, Variation 36, played by Igor Levit](https://open.spotify.com/track/6ZAYR95RogkxQrh3kparcK?si=lWVrn9IfR5uSnEVNpJpiow).

## One final thing: new music sheet shared on MuseScore

I shared a new music sheet of an old German folklore, *Ich liebe den Frühling*
(I love the spring, 我爱春天) on
[MuseScore](https://musescore.com/user/32500761/scores/6165050).

<iframe width="100%" height="394"
src="https://musescore.com/user/32500761/scores/6165050/embed" frameborder="0"
allowfullscreen allow="autoplay; fullscreen"></iframe> <span><a
href="https://musescore.com/user/32500761/scores/6165050/s/Pgx9BJ"
target="_blank">Ich liebe den Fruehling</a> by <a
href="https://musescore.com/user/32500761">AccioThatLovesMusic</a></span>

Happy weekend!
