---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 9 (June 8-14, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinates me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Biology

### mTOR regulates stress-induced mutagenesis

[Cipponi *et al.*](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6495/1127)
reported on *Nature* their findings that mTOR regulates drug resistance.
Non-genotoxic drug selection leads to growth limiting stress, which activates
DNA damage response and inhibits mTOR signalling, which lead to less accurate
DNA repair. The net effect is an increase of genetic diversity and drug
resistance.

Using multiple small molecules that target several targets and genome-wide shRNA
screening, the team identified mTOR as a common evolutionary capacitor, namely
knock-down of genes positively regulating mTOR activity increases genetic
diversity. They found that inhibition of mTOR fosters adaptive mutagenesis by
repressing accurate DNA repair.

The final figure (Figure 4) of the paper shows the dynamic change of the fitness
landscape of cancer cells under pharmacological pressure. In the first phase of
adaptation, which takes about 35-45 weeks (shorter than a month), an equilibrium
is gradually established between damages induced by the deleterious effect
conferred by initial genomic instability and the beneficial effect conferred by
resistant genomic configurations. The equilibrium is reached in the second phase
of the response.

## Mathematics and machine learning

The mathematician Weinan E gave a talk on *SIAM Mathematics of Data Science
Conference* with the title *A mathematical perspective of of Machine Learning*.
The recording is available on
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4PKudVGz4GM&list=PLcntFj46o5pFBKIGgKJ55q10D5pYc8JOu&index=8).
