---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 7 (May 25-31, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
---

Here are the things I discovered this week that fascinates me.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Biology

### Human macrophage development at single-cell resolution

[Bian *et
al*.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2316-7) report on *Nature*
their effort to characterize human macrophage development at single-cell
resolution.

Macrophages are part of the innate immune system. They are also the first cells of
the nascent immune system that emerge during embryonic development. In mice,
embryonic macrophages infiltrate developing organs, and differentiate there into
tissue-resident macrophages. While this process is well characterized, how
macrophages in human differentiate during the development process is less well
known.

The authors determine to better understand this process from the perspective of
gene expression profiles of each macrophage cell. To this purpose, they isolated
CD45+ haematopoietic cells, the cells that responsible for the formation of
blood cellular components (`haema`=blood in Greek, `poiesis`=to make), from human
embryos. Next, they used single-cell RNA sequencing to characterize them. In
particular, they performed single-cell culture of a subset of cells, known as
yolk sac-derived myeloid-biased progenitors that express surface markers CD45,
CD34, and CD44.

Such myeloid progenitors develop later into myeloid cells, including
megakaryocytes, erythrocytes, mast cells, and myeloblast including into
basophil, neutrophil, eosinophils, and monocytes, which mature into macrophages.
The alternative route to myeloid cell differentiation is to differentiate into
lymphoids, such as natural killer cells, T cells, and B cells. Together they
constitute the innate and adaptive immune system. The following figure by A. Rad
and Mikael Häggström, M.D., used under the GNU Free Documentation License,
provides a high-level overview of this process.

![Differentiation of haematopoiesis progenitor cells,
wikimedia](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f0/Hematopoiesis_simple.svg/1024px-Hematopoiesis_simple.svg.png){:.center-image}

They investigated macrophage heterogeneity across multiple anatomical sites, and
identified different types of tissue residential macrophages in the central
nervous system, liver, lung, and skin. Further more, they analysed the
specification trajectories of resident macrophages, and compared embryonic
resident macrophages and their adult counterparts (the data of which were
collected from published studies).

The dataset can be interesting for macrophage researchers, and in particular
researchers of tissue resident macrophages such as microglia, a special type of
macrophages in the brain. And it can be a good reference dataset to benchmark
macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem-cells.

The single-cell sequencing data of human yolk sacs are available on NCBI Gene
Expression Omnibus with the accession number
[GSE137010](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE137010). The
data of haematopoietic cells in human embryos at different development stages
(known as Carnegie stages) and multiple sites (yolk sac, head, liver, blood,
lung, and skin) are available at
[GSE133345](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE133345).

### Lysyl oxidase mediates drug resistance in triple-negative breast cancer

I took notes [here in another blog post]({% post_url
2020-05-26-LOX-drug-resistance %}).

### Leverage loss of heterozygosity of essential genes to find cancer targets

Human cells contain two copies of each chromosome, one from the father and the
other from the mother. Genes, which reside on chromosomes, have therefore two
copies usually (barring from those genes encoded by sex chromosomes X and Y in
males). The copies are also called alleles. If out of any reason one allele is
lost, it is called loss of heterozygosity, often abbreviated as LOH. It is, for
instance, often observed in cancer.

Hundreds of genes undergo loss of heterozygosity in cancer cells. [Nichols *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-16399-y) reported *Nature
Communications* how they used loss of heterozygosity of *polymorphisms* in
essential genes to propose drug targets. Their hypothesis is that inactivation
of the single allele retained in tumours can selectively kill cancer cells but
not somatic cells.

To verify the hypothesis, they shovel through many datasets and identify more
than 5000 variants in 1278 essential genes that undergo LOH in cancer, and
evaluated the potential for each to be targeted using allele-specific
gene-editing, short interference RNA, or small molecules. They showed that
mono-allelic inactivation of two essential genes, [PRIM1 (DNA primase small
subunit 1, GeneID 5557)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/5557) and [EXOSC8
(exosome component 8)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/11340), selectively
inhibited cancer cell growth.

While the results remain to be validated *in vivo* and the toxicity profiles of
such treatments need to be characterized, the idea is an interesting one, and it
may inspire further research in this direction.

For those who are interested in how they came to the variants, here is a short
summary. They mined the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database, filtered
to include only common variants in genes for which copy number calls were
available through the NCBI Genomic Data Commons. They found 228,440 potential
targetable variants.

They also looked at patient-derived genome-wide copy number and LOH data from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).

The essential gene list was derived from three genome-wide loss-of-function
screens of haploid human cell lines, and filtered using CCLE gene copy-number
and RNA expression data to keep only reasonably expressed genes. Other filters
such as tumor suppressor genes were also used.

## Computational biology

## Chemistry

### OCR software for chemical structures

[OSRA (Optical Structure Recognition
Application)](https://cactus.nci.nih.gov/osra/) is a software that recognizes
graphical presentations of chemical structures, such as those in PDF and image
files, into computer-readable formats such as SMILEs and SD files. It is
developed at the National Cancer Institute of U.S. The link at NCI points the
latest version of v1.4.0 as of May 2020. A major re-write, OSRA II, is available
at [SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/osra/).

I gave it a try and it seems to work well with an example that I found.

### Predicting physicochemical properties of small molecules

[SwissADME](http://www.swissadme.ch/) computes physicochemical descriptors and
predicts ADME (adsorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) parameters.
They can be used as reference values to predict pharmacokinetic properties,
drug-like nature and medicinal chemistry friendliness small molecules.

Similar with working with any other prediction tools, the results should be
taken with a grain of salt, the interpretation should only be done with caution,
and ideally a human expert should be involved to help with the interpretation.
The tool is nevertheless useful for anyone who works with drug-like molecules to
get a first, rough idea how their molecule may look like from a pharmacological
point of view.

Another web-based tool for similar purposes is
[MolInspiration](https://www.molinspiration.com/). It was used in the [Medicinal
Chemistry online
course](https://www.edx.org/course/medicinal-chemistry-the-molecular-basis-of-drug-di)
at EdX that I took. The course was given by Erland Stevens, an outstanding
teacher, and is offered by Davidson's College and Novartis.

## Computer science

### Containerization with Docker

I have an application that I need to build locally and share and run remotely.
For this purpose one can use *Docker*, which essentially runs a program in an
encapsulated environment to keep it isolated from the host and from other
containers.

To achieve this, each container interacts with its private file system. This
file system is provided by a Docker image. In another word, an image includes
everything an application needs: the script or the binary code, dependencies,
and data files.

Though it is perfectly fine to use Docker daemon as explained in the Docker
tutorial, some issues make people concerned about using the Docker daemon. A
solution to these issues is to use `Podman`. The reasons why using Podman makes
sense is explained by William Henry in a blog of [RedHat
Developers](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2019/02/21/podman-and-buildah-for-docker-users/).

For laymen like me, it suffices to know that Podman can do the job of a Docker
daemon. Images of Podman and Docker are compatible. And the commands of Podman
are identical with those of Docker. That means we can setup a Docker image and
run it on Podman.

### Tricks that I learned

* To specify the compiler or the parameters passed to the compiler used to
  build R packages, edit the file `~/.R/Makevars`, and specify variables like
  `CC` (used for C code) and `CXX` (C++ code).
* The reason I needed to learn the trick above is that my R package
  [rqubic](https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/rqubic.html)
  in Bioconductor reported error when `gcc-10` was used with the parameter
  `-fno-common`. See explanation of this flag
  [here](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Code-Gen-Options.html). In essence,
  it reports error when a variable is defined multiple times, for instance by
  an definition in the header file, which is included in multiple files. The
  solution: use `extern` to tell C that the variable is defined somewhere else
  (known as `declaration`), and define the variable in the C code only once.
* It is considered to be [a good typography to use curly quotes instead of
  straight
  quotes](https://practicaltypography.com/straight-and-curly-quotes.html). In
  kramdown Markdown used by Jekyll, use `&ldquo;` and `&rdquo;` for left and
  right double quotes (&ldquo;I shall leave now.&rdquo;). Similarly, use
  `&lsquo;` and `&rsquo;` for left and right single quotes (&lsquo;I shall
  leave now.&rsquo;).
* In kramdown Markdown, use `&hellip;` to show an ellipsis like 1, 2, &hellip;. For
  other typographic symbols, including em-dash (&mdash;), en-dash (&ndash;),
  left guillemet (&laquo;), and right guillemet (&raquo;), see [the
  documentation](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/rdoc/Kramdown/Options.html).
* I found out that it is possible to use `vim` key bindings in `RStudio`. The
    option is in Menu->Options->Code->Editting->General->Keybindings. Use
    `Ctrl-1` to move to the source pane and `Ctrl-2` to move to the console. Now
    I can use Rstudio as if I am using vim.

## Statistics and machine learning

### Rule-based models in R with Cubist and RuleFit

Max Kuhn posted an blog post on modern rule-based models on [R
Views](https://rviews.rstudio.com/2020/05/21/modern-rule-based-models/). He
introduced the R packages `dplyr` and `rpart`, and highlighted the C5.0 rules,
the *Cubist* method, and the *RuleFit* method.

The *Cubist* method is an ensemble method
works like boosting, using multiple models that are built sequentially to make
predictions. And it uses nearest-neighbour adjustment following model
predictions, using similar data in the training set to update prediction
results.

One step further, while Cubist creates rules as data subsets then estimates a
linear regression model within each subset, RuleFit creates rules as predictors
and then fits one, optionally generalized, linear model.

### Bayesian analysis with R for drug development

I read the first three chapters of the book [Bayesian Analysis with R for Drug
Development](https://www.routledge.com/Bayesian-Analysis-with-R-for-Drug-Development-Concepts-Algorithms-and/Yang-Novick/p/book/9781138295872)
by Harry Yang and Steven Novick working at AstraZeneca. The first three chapters
introduce drug development, concepts and algorithms of Bayesian statistics, and
sample size and power calculation.

I like the style of writing, which is clear, compact, and application-oriented.
The authors introduced drug development including discovery, clinical trials,
and chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC). They guided readers through the
Bayes's theorem, prior setting, and different sampling methods such as rejection
sampling, Gibbs sampling, and Metropolis-Hastings sampling. Using binomial
distribution and normal distribution as examples, they showed readers how the
algorithms work in principle, and importantly, how day-by-day analysis is done
with commonly used open-source software for Bayesian analysis, including
WinBUGS/OpenBUGS, JAGS, and Stan. In the third and the last chapter of the
*Background* section of the book, they explained an important application of
Bayesian statistics in drug discovery and development, namely estimating minimal
sample size of a clinical trial and calculating the statistical power of such a
trial.

The rest of the book deals with case studies of Bayesian statistics in
preclinical and clinical research (section II), and applications in CMC (section
III). I have not dived into the details yet. But skimming through the chapters
left me the impression that the authors have done a good job in capturing the
many aspects of applied Bayesian statistics into self-containing short stories,
which help the readers grasp the essence and advantage of Bayesian approaches
quickly.

I recommend the book to researchers who are new to Bayesian statistics and
who want to apply it in drug discovery and development.

## Other gems

* I discovered [Pure bash bible](https://github.com/dylanaraps/pure-bash-bible)
    by Dylan Araps on Github. It seems to be an interesting collection of tips
    and tricks of using bash to perform routine tasks.
* The new outfit for the SpaceX launch (Kim Shiflett/NASA via AP): maybe it will
    become new fashion of car drivers, not only those who drive a Tesla.

![New outfit for
SpaceX](https://scx2.b-cdn.net/gfx/news/hires/2020/3-spacexs1stas.jpg)
