---
layout: single
title: Stay mentally healthy during the corona virus!
category: career
tags: emotion
---

This is the fifth week that people in Switzerland are quarantined due to the corona virus. A tough time for many of us. My biggest challenge is to focus on work during working hours and to balance between work and family life. The challenge was not only accentuated by the paradoxical combinations of lack of personal contact and overwhelming virtual information and communication at the same time.

On the positive side, here are a few things that I learned during this time: how
to live with emotions, how to communicate effectively, how to master information instead of being mastered, and last but not least, how to balance between life and work. 

## Learning to live with emotions

One metaphor (or a hypothesis) may help: riding an elephant. As far as I can tell, it was discussed in depth in the book *The Happiness Hypothesis: Putting Ancient Wisdom to the Test of Modern Science* by Jonathan Haidt. The hypothesis in its essence is that we live with our emotions as if we ride an elephant. We are the rider, and the emotion is an elephant. When the elephant is in good mood, we can fully control it. When the elephant is out of control, we may find it difficult to control it any more. More information about this metaphor can be found [here](http://sourcesofinsight.com/the-elephant-and-the-rider/).

This hypothesis was particularly helpful for me because it suggests that we are
not the emotions, but we have to control them. It is in our nature, likely
both hard-coded in our genome by the evolution and soft-coded in our culture,
that we have the emotions and we have to live with them and, if we decide to, to control them.

The prerequisite to controlling our emotion is our physical and mental health -
the mind-body axis needs to be in a good shape. Eating, sleeping, and physical
exercise *etc.* matter tremendously. 

The RAIN technique may help, see [*Manage Emotional Pains with RAINS*](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/changepower/201202/manage-emotional-pains-rains) by Meg Selig, or in Chinese [你的队友和孩子有没有在家呆到精神失常？ ](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/jRRHPfhy64V0AQFHRnTCaw) by Xiaocheng Dai (戴晓橙, network ID 橙子, mindbodygarden.com).

RAIN means **Recognize**, **Acknowledge** (or Allow, or Accept), **Investigate** (or Inquire), and **Nurish**. 

* **Recognize** means that the first step is to recognize the emotions or thoughts that are troubling. Observe them without judgment, just like you are observing weather changing or moon rising. Naming them can also help shrink them to manageable size, for instance 'I am overwhelmed by virtual communication', or 'I am worried for my friends who belong to the high-risk population of the corona virus'.
* **Acknowledge** means that next to accept the emotion as a reality. This can
be tough and difficult to follow. But accepting the emotion as a reality does
not mean that you have to like it. It means to nail mental contents, pleasant or
not, down under observation and in focus. The aim is to stop the emotions being
amorphous. 'Okay, I am overwhelmed by virtual communication'.
* **Investigate** means that to use curiosity and analytical ability to analyse
 the emotion. Talk with yourself with kindness: what triggered the distress? Have I experienced similar situations before? What thoughts and feelings are connected to these feelings? Is my thinking reasonable and realistic? What actions can I take to help myself or another person? What help do I need? What can I do?
* **Nourish** (or nuture, or non-identification): the thoughts, feelings, and sensations are not *you*. Step to the side, watch the emotions objectively, and take care of yourself. Do things that nourish you: listening to music, reading a book, or taking a deep breath.

Meg Selig recommends a fifth step, **Self-compassion** (making the synonym
RAINS). It is merged into the *Nourish* item in the post by Xiaocheng. The key
idea is to be friendly, generous, and sympathize with oneself. It can be
challenging to learn the humanness, imperfection of oneself and live with the
suffering. But it is a necessary requisite to emphasize with lovers, friends,
and other people. 

## Learning to communicate effectively

Given the special circumstances, it becomes more important to communication effectively. A lot of words are spent on this topic. Here are a few suggestions that I found useful.

Effective communication needs open discussion of duty, which in turn requires
that both parties know what they want to achieve: do I want support from the
communication partner? Do I want acknowledgement of him or her? Express that
clearly, without any ambiguity.

Next, learn to live with being rejected in communication. Being rejected happens
often, not only in communication but also in marketing, in applications, *etc.*
They are not targeting you as a person. Try to find alternatives and to handle a
solution that satisfy both parties.

## Learning to master information overload

As said before, I am overwhelmed by a lot of information around. Not all of them
are of high quality - some are more confusing or misleading than helpful - and
not all of them are of use at all.

What helped me is to learn to stay *being informed* but not *being sucked*. On
on the one side, is is helpful to set clear boundaries between activities, both
spatial and temporal, and treat 'information gathering' as one activity that
needs to be separated from other ones. 

What definitely helped was to focus on the real life - the valuable time with parents, spouses, and kids. It helped me a lot to do things, however trivial they are, that help people. It can be just walking with someone, and doing exercise with them.

And I found doing things alone that I enjoy is a good meditation. It helped me
to withstand quite some difficult time by making music, reading both scientific
papers and comic strips, and writing essays and blog posts.

## How to balance life and work

It is a constant struggle to balance life and work. During the corona time, I
found it more challenging to do the balance well. And sometimes I feel ashamed
that I cannot work as much as I wish so.

On the other side, I now see the time as a chance to observe the balance from
a new light. First, I value learning without goals more. Second, I better see my egos and ambitions, and learn to set realistic expectations and goals for myself and for others. Last but not least, I learn to observe how I and my family members pursue their goals. 

