---
layout: post
title: Nonviolent communication
category: Book
---

I finished the book *Nonviolent communication* (the 3rd edition) by Marshall B.
Rosenberg this week. Here are my learning notes.

* TOC 
{:toc}

## The principles of nonviolent communication 

The author introduces the nonviolent communication (NVC) as a four-step
process:

1. We **observe** and **describe** the concrete actions that affect our
   well-being.
2. We **name** and **share** our feeling we have in relation to what we
   observe.
3. We **identify** and **communicate** the needs, values, desires, *etc.* that
   create our feelings.
4. We **decide** and **request** concrete actions in order to enrich our lives.

The process roots in empathy, respect, and tenderness with others and with
ourselves. It rejects moralistic judgements, comparisons, or evaluation.

### Observations

When we observe and describe to others our observations, it is necessary to
separate them from evaluations. If we mix observations with evaluations, others
tend to hear criticism. Instead of static generalizations, describe specific
observations specific to time and context. For instance, instead of saying
"Tony is a good team player", we can say "Tony helped other members of the team
by sharing his experience."

### Feelings

The second component is to express our feelings clearly and specifically. It is
important to distinguish between expression of feeling and thoughts,
assessments, and interpretations. For instance, instead of saying "I am not a
good piano player", we can say "I am annoyed/impatient/frustrated with myself
that I cannot play piano well".

A simple way to check whether we have expressed our feelings is to use a
sentence of the form "I feel this because *I* ...", and to refrain from using
"I feel this because *you*...". While the first sentence expresses *my* feelings,
the second sentence expresses rather my *judgement* and is almost certainly
interpreted as criticism.

As a foreign-language speaker, I find it challenging to build a vocabulary of
feelings that different between nuisances. The two figures were particularly
helpful for me. One was made by the National Institute of Corrections, U.S.,
that shows words expressing feelings and emotions with emojis. The other one
was based on data derived from psychology research, projecting words expression
feelings and emotions by dimension reduction. A more recent publication even
maps these words in two four dimensions by using principal component analysis.
Nevertheless, for my purpose of finding an appropriate word to express myself,
this 2D plot suffices.

### Needs

Stoic philosophers like Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius argued that what others
say and do may be the stimulus for, but never the cause of, our feelings. Our
own needs, desires, and values cause our feelings instead.

When we communicate with others and hear negative comments, we have four
options: (1) blame ourselves, (2) blame others, (3) sense our own feelings and
needs, and (4) sense the feelings and needs hidden in other person's negative
comments.  Try to avoid (1) and (2) and get more muscle in (3) and (4).

Judgments, criticisms, diagnoses, and interpretations of others can be seen as
alienated expression of our own needs and values. When others hear criticism,
they tend to invest their energy in self-dense and counterattack. It helps
others to communicate compassionately if we connect our feelings to our needs.

We can never meet our own needs at the expense of others.

### Requests

The fourth component of NVC is to communicate what we would to request of each
other to enrich each of our lives. Generalized, vague or ambiguous words should
be replaced by actionable terms. For instance, instead of saying "Mary please
take care of your sister", we may say "Mary, will please help your sister wear
her shoes?" The clearer we are about what we want back, the more likely that we
will get it.

We have to make sure that the audience of our requests perceive them indeed as
requests, not as demands or blames. And we must make sure that get the request
accurately, for instance by asking them paraphrase or rephrase it.

## The role of empathy

Empathy is an understanding of what others are experiencing. When I hear
others, I tend to give advices or reassurance or to rush to my own position or
feeling. Empathy, on the other hand, calls us to empty my mind and listen to
others with the whole being.

No matter what words others may use to express themselves, I should try to
simply listen for their observations, feelings, needs, and requests. Then I may
reflect back, and paraphrase what I have understood in the same four-step
process described above, using a positive language. I keep in this empathy
state and allow others the opportunity to fully express them before turning my
attention to requests for relief or to solutions.

An important lesson I learned is that I need empathy in order to give it. When
I am in a bad physical condition or irritated, I cannot give sufficient empathy
others need. A lesson I learned is that I sense myself being defensive or
unable to empathize, I can take time out, breath deeply and give myself
empathy, or scream non-violently by strictly following the
observations-feeling-needs-and-requests rule.

In that aspect, we can use the NVC techniques to keep empathy for ourselves.
When we fail or make mistakes, we can use the process of NVC to mourn and
forgive ourselves, and to show ourselves where we can grow. By assessing my
unmet needs and making specific requests to make them met, I can contribute to
the life of my own and of others.

In the same line, self-compassion means that I choose in daily life consciously
to act only to meet our own needs and values rather than out of duty, for
extrinsic rewards, or to avoid punishment. Put in an extreme, *do only things
that means playing for me*. 

I experienced the relief several times when I
realised that things that I thought I *have to* do in fact can be done by
others and probably better, and I can focus on what I *choose to* do. I
resonate the author when he found out, for instance, that he can live much
better without writing clinical report that he thought he had to write. Once we
weight the investment (previous time and life) and the return (money, power,
*etc.*) of things that we thought we must do, often we can make better,
informed decisions that enrich our life.

## Expressing anger

We can follow five steps to express anger:

1. Stop and breathe,
2. Identify my judgemental thoughts,
3. Connect with my needs, 
4. Empathize with the other person so that he or she will hear me, and
5. Express my feelings and unmet needs

## Solving conflicts

As a parent of two children, I have to solve conflicts from time to time. What I learned from the NYC technique is that I can concentrate on identifying the needs of both parties. Only when I am sure that I understand all needs well, I should start looking for strategies to fulfill these needs.

During the process, I should not judge or analyse the conflict, however tempting that is. Instead, I remain focused on needs. And I do not hear "no" as a rejection, but rather as an expression of needs that keep the person from saying "yes". 

## Appraisal and appreciation

NYC encourages the expression of appreciation solely for celebration, instead of influencing or manipulating the behaviour of others.

We state three things if we want to appraise someone: the action, the need, and the feelings. For instance, instead of saying "Markus you are such a helpful boy!", we can say "Markus you brought the tools to me when I needed it urgently. That makes me proud."

## Conclusions

I enjoyed the book. I am trying to implement some techniques proposed by the
author into my daily life. In some cases, it indeed helped me and others by
exposing mutual emotions and feelings to each other. In more cases, I still
fail live up to all the requirements of NYC, but at least I realize that I have
a choice to do it better next time.

When I think of the many great friends, colleagues, and mentors that I
fortunately have, I find that almost most of them actually master one or the
other aspect of nonviolent communication. The people I cherish observe
carefully, articulate their feelings and needs without making moralistic
judgement or being negative or pessimistic, and make clear and specific
requests that help both them and me. They are lively examples that I can learn
from.

The book complements the book *How to Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids
Will Talk* by Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish. While the book by M. B. Rosenberg
does not only focuses on parenting, the NYC techniques are actually very well
embodied in the other book. After all, the needs of children are in many ways
identical to those of adults.

The many poems and lyrics by the author and Ruth Bebermeyer, a colleague of
him, added human touch and rhythmic beauty to the book. The language was clear,
concise, and humorous. The message of empathy, collaboration, authenticity and
freedom, which are printed on the cover of the 3rd edition that I read, is well
received.

