---
layout: post
title: >-
    Discoveries Weekly No. 12 (June 29-July 5, 2020)
category: DiscoveryWeekly
mathjax: true
---

Here are some discoveries that fascinate me this week.

* TOC
{:toc}

## Biology

### Structural cells regulate organ-specific immune responses

When we talk about immune response, we often think of gene expression changes
that happen in haematopoietic immune cells, such as myeloid cells, such as
monocytes and neutrophils, which control innate immunity, and lymphoid cells,
such as T cells and B cells, which constitute adaptive immunity. But what about
other cell types? We know that many of them also contribute to pathogen defence, but how is that achieved? How is expression of immune genes controlled in non-immune cells?

[Krausgruber *et
al.*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2424-4) reported their
systematic study of regulation of immune genes in three major types of
structural cells: epithelium, endothelium, and fibroblasts. They characterized
cell types across twelve organs in mice, using cellular phenotyping,
transcriptome sequencing, chromatin accessibility profiling, and epigenome
mapping. They observed complex immune gene activity and regulation in these
structural cells, which are highly organ-specific, and seem to modulate
interactions between structural and haematopoietic cells.

The dataset can be used to analyse immune response from structural cells at
multiple omics levels. We are not sure yet whether human cells follow the same
principles. Another aspect I miss is the multi-omics profiling following
perturbation by pathogens or chemical matters that induce immune response.
Nevertheless, the dataset is already impressive enough and will for sure inspire
further studies in the same direction.

## Computational biology

### Modelling interactions between the immune system and cancer

This review, [*Interactions Between the Immune System and Cancer: A Brief Review
of Non-spatial Mathematical
Models*](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11538-010-9526-3) by Eftimie
*et al.* summarizes some commonly used non-spatial mathematical models to study
interactions between the immune system and cancer. I discovered it through
another paper that I [read the other day]({% post_url
2020-06-25-math-model-and-scRNAseq-for-immunotherapy %}) on integrating
mathematical modelling with single-cell omics data, [Griffiths *et
al.*](https://www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/06/19/1918937117) (PNAS 2020).

Though the review is almost ten years old and therefore could not
anticipate certain types of data, for instance single-cell sequencing, the
principles of mathematical modelling are valid, and the approaches may be useful
also for other disease indications as well.

## Programming

* In a R ShinyApp, changes in `ui.R` or `server.R` will cause the server to
    restart automatically. If other dependencies (say R functions) are changed
    and a manual restart is necessary, it suffices to run `touch restart.txt`
    command in the ShinyApp directory. It will force the ShinyApp to restart.

## Other gems

### Get the courage to leave familiar tracks

I am reading the book *Beschleunigung - Die Veränderung der Zeitstrukturen in
der Moderne* by Hartmut Rosa (an English version, *Social Acceleration: A New
Theory of Modernity*), which I find a stunningly rich, informative, and
comprehensive critique of acceleration. [It makes me think how to live]({%
post_url 2020-06-17-about-time %}).

This week I discovered a talk that Hartmut Rosa gave to first-year students of
the Friedrich-Schiller University of Jena, named [*Wächter, wie lange noch die
Nacht? Ueber intellektuelle Redlichkeit als Leitprinzip in schwieriger
Zeit*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=koWklQKd7yU) (in German only). The talk
is directed at new students, but I think the lessons are valid for other people,
too.

I was reminded by the observation of *baseline happiness*, and the observation
that how happy we are is strongly influenced by how we perceive our environment
and how we participate in shaping it. In order to actively shape the
environment, We can expand our horizon by learning new
things, we can bring up our initiative, and we can live and think like people we
want to become.

Hartmut Rosa reminded me that we need both enthusiasm and hard work to be
successful in our work, but they are not all. Good ideas and inspirations are
important. Paradoxically, neuroscience confirms that good ideas and inspirations
may not necessarily come from hard work alone, but sparkle rather in unexpected
time and space, for instance during a walk or in a party. Therefore, taking rest
and exercising regularly and engaging in hobbies are not only important for a
balanced life, but also important for work, especially scientific research.

An important concept I learned was *scientific honesty* (*Wissenschaftliche
Redlichkeit* in German). A key part of it is to take opposite opinions and
evidence that arguing against my own opinions seriously, even more seriously
than my own opinions. That does not mean we have to discard or change our
positions, but means that we should not ignore or deny
&lsquo;uncomfortable&rsquo; facts. The scientific honesty will make our
judgement and world view more informed.

Two other things leave me ponder. One is that when being asked how would she live
if she has another chance, the grandmother of Hartmut Rosa, shortly before she
passed away, replied that she would live exactly as she did, though without
fear. It is a daily challenge to live with trust in oneself, not fear, to deal
with the changes in the environment.

The other is the text of lecture *Science as a Vocation* (*Wissenschaft als
Beruf*) by Max Weber, a German sociologist and political economist. Both [German
version](https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Wissenschaft_als_Beruf) and [English
version](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/X/WeberScienceVocation.pdf) are
available. I was not aware of the text before, and therefore are thankful that
Hartmut Rosa introduced this to the students and me.

### Modelling study

{% include image.html
url="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/modeling_study.png"
description="Modelling study, from XKCD"
%}
